                                                        Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895



                                                             Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                                   Transportation Research Part C
                                                      journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/trc




Navigating the queue: A dynamic pricing framework for
ride-sourcing platform with heterogeneous demand
Zheng Huang a , Renxin Zhong a,∗, Tianlu Pan b , Enming Liang                                                 c
                                                                                                                  ,
Agachai Sumalee d , Yunping Huang e,∗
a
  Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Transportation Systems, School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Shenzhen, China
b
  Department of Network Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
c School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
d
  School of Integrated Innovation, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
e
  Department of Civil Engineering, Schulich School of Engineering, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada




a r t i c l e            i n f o                           a b s t r a c t

Keywords:                                                  Ride-sourcing platforms commonly employ dynamic pricing to regulate travel demand and dis-
Ride-sourcing                                              patch or relocate vehicles to manage supply distribution. However, existing strategies often over-
Dynamic pricing                                            look the heterogeneity in spatial-temporal demand distribution and diverse customer behaviors.
Heterogeneous demand
                                                           To address this gap, this paper proposes an origin-destination (OD)-based dynamic pricing frame-
Queue jumping
Approximate dynamic programming
                                                           work that integrates link-node-level vehicle dispatching and relocation decisions, while account-
                                                           ing for heterogeneous demand and customer queue-jumping behavior. In this framework, cus-
                                                           tomers, characterized by varying values of time (VOT) and willingness to pay (WTP), can choose
                                                           to wait, abandon the trip, or pay a premium to jump the queue. To model this heterogeneous
                                                           behavior, we introduce an integral-form demand function that captures elasticity with respect to
                                                           both VOT and WTP. The dynamic pricing problem is formulated as a constrained optimization
                                                           problem that jointly determines OD-based pricing and queue-jumping premiums. A rolling hori-
                                                           zon approach, featuring a short decision interval with a longer planning horizon, is introduced to
                                                           capture queueing dynamics that extend across periods, thereby supporting both real-time respon-
                                                           siveness and long-term optimization. An event-triggered control scheme is further incorporated
                                                           to reduce computational complexity and stabilize pricing ﬂuctuations. An Approximate Dynamic
                                                           Programming (ADP) approach is adopted to manage vehicle dispatching and relocation at the
                                                           link-node level. Empirical validation on the Manhattan road network conﬁrmed the eﬀectiveness
                                                           of the proposed approach in improving platform proﬁtability, increasing demand satisfaction, and
                                                           enhancing overall system eﬃciency.




1. Introduction

   Ride-sourcing platforms, such as Didi, Uber, and Lyft, which use Internet-based technology to match passengers and drivers,
have revolutionized the transportation industry and the form of personal mobility (Wang and Yang, 2019; Qin et al., 2022). When
customers request a ride, platforms quote a trip fare and an estimated waiting time based on the spatial-temporal distribution of

    ∗ Corresponding authors.

    E-mail addresses: huangzh227@mail2.sysu.edu.cn (Z. Huang), zhrenxin@mail.sysu.edu.cn (R. Zhong), pantl@pcl.ac.cn (T. Pan),
eliang4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk (E. Liang), agachai.s@chula.ac.th (A. Sumalee), yunping.huang@ucalgary.ca (Y. Huang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2026.105895
Received 23 November 2025; Received in revised form 18 July 2026; Accepted 20 July 2026
Available online 24 July 2026
0968-090X/© 2026 The Author(s).           Published by Elsevier Ltd.      This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895




                                                Fig. 1. Screenshots of Didi and Lyft apps.




demand and supply. During periods of high customer demand, platforms may apply surge pricing to the base fare and quote longer
estimated waiting times. Customers can then decide whether to submit or cancel their requests.
    Once customers conﬁrm their ride requests, they typically join a matching queue to await driver assignment. Many platforms
also allow customers to obtain higher matching priority by paying an additional premium. This practice has been widely adopted
in real-world ride-sourcing platforms. For example, as illustrated in Fig. 1, Didi oﬀers multiple service categories, including Econ-
omy, Standard, and Priority, with diﬀerent fare levels and expected waiting times. Similarly, Lyft oﬀers Standard and Priority Pickup
services, where customers who pay a higher fare are promised shorter pickup times. Although these services are marketed as diﬀeren-
tiated products, they essentially implement priority-based matching schemes in which higher-paying customers receive preferential
access to available vehicles. Consequently, customers with higher values of time (VOT) and willingness to pay (WTP) are generally
more inclined to choose surge pricing or premium services in exchange for shorter waiting times. This practical observation provides
strong practical motivation for explicitly modeling queue-jumping behavior in ride-sourcing systems.
    Dynamic pricing has long been recognized as an eﬀective approach for demand regulation in ride-sourcing systems. Early studies
primarily focused on static pricing, assuming comprehensive knowledge of the system to determine optimal pricing policies under
equilibrium conditions (Wang et al., 2016; Fang et al., 2019; Banerjee et al., 2022). To better cope with the uncertainty and non-
stationarity of real-world environments, subsequent research shifted toward dynamic pricing, which has been shown to be more
robust to ﬂuctuations in system parameters (Banerjee et al., 2015) and more eﬀective in promoting spatial-temporal equilibrium.
Dynamic pricing has also been integrated with various incentive mechanisms, such as reward schemes for customers (Yang et al.,
2020) and wage optimization for drivers (Bai et al., 2019), to further improve market eﬃciency. Despite these advances, existing
pricing models generally rely on aggregate demand representations and pay limited attention to customer heterogeneity. Moreover,
the priority service tiers oﬀered by ride-sourcing platforms provide strong practical motivation for explicitly modeling queue-jumping
behavior, yet such mechanisms remain largely unexplored in the literature.
    In addition to demand-side pricing, ride-sourcing platforms can alleviate supply-demand imbalances through vehicle dispatching
and relocation, which play a critical role in improving ﬂeet utilization and enhancing operational eﬃciency (Zhu et al., 2024; Guo
et al., 2026). To address these large-scale sequential decision-making problems, approximate dynamic programming (ADP) and
reinforcement learning (RL) have emerged as eﬀective solution approaches for high-dimensional and stochastic ride-sourcing systems
(Ke et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023, 2025). Building on these methodologies, recent studies have investigated the joint optimization
of pricing and vehicle operations by integrating dispatching and relocation decisions to improve overall system performance (Chen
et al., 2019; Lei et al., 2020; Liang et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025). However, most existing
studies optimize pricing and vehicle operations at the same spatial and temporal resolutions, making it diﬃcult to simultaneously
exploit OD-level demand information and link-node-level operational ﬂexibility.
    Another practical challenge of dynamic pricing lies in its tendency to introduce undesirable price volatility in response to short-
term ﬂuctuations in supply and demand (Yan et al., 2020). Rolling horizon optimization provides an eﬀective approach for addressing
such sequential decision-making problems by repeatedly updating decisions as new information becomes available. It has been suc-
cessfully applied to traﬃc state prediction (Pan et al., 2013; Zhong et al., 2017), trajectory planning (Xu and Geroliminis, 2026), taxi

                                                                    2
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895


dispatching (Miao et al., 2015), car-sharing (Li et al., 2025) and logistics (Tran and Stokkink, 2026) systems. These studies demon-
strate its ability to balance real-time responsiveness with long-term decision quality, making it a promising approach for developing
stable and adaptive dynamic pricing strategies in ride-sourcing systems.
    To address these challenges, this paper proposes an integrated OD-based dynamic pricing framework that incorporates customer
heterogeneity and queue-jumping behavior. Customers make pricing and queue-jumping decisions according to their individual VOT
and WTP, while unmatched requests remain in the system until they are either matched or time out. A rolling horizon framework
is adopted to capture the inter-temporal dynamics of the matching queue, and an event-triggered pricing mechanism is introduced
to reduce unnecessary price ﬂuctuations and computational burden. Meanwhile, vehicle dispatching and relocation are optimized at
the link-node level using ADP, enabling the coordinated optimization of demand regulation and supply management across multiple
spatial scales. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

 • Propose an OD-based dynamic pricing framework that integrates link-node-level vehicle dispatching and relocation decisions to
   address heterogeneous spatial-temporal demand distribution.
 • Model customer heterogeneity in VOT and WTP, and incorporate a queue-jumping premium mechanism to reﬂect individual

   waiting and queue-jumping decisions.
 • Adopt a rolling horizon approach to capture queueing demand that carries over into subsequent periods, combined with an event-

   triggered scheme to reduce abrupt price ﬂuctuations.
 • Apply ADP to manage detailed vehicle dispatching and relocation decisions at the link-node level eﬃciently.


    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the existing literature on customer participation and het-
erogeneity, demand-side modeling and pricing strategies, and joint pricing and vehicle operations in ride-sourcing systems. Section 3
presents the OD-based dynamic pricing scheme incorporating a queue-jumping mechanism and models elastic customer demand
based on individuals’ VOT and WTP. The dynamic pricing problem is formulated under a rolling horizon framework and coupled
with an event-triggered scheme, while the vehicle dispatching and relocation problem at the link-node level is presented, along with
an ADP solution. Section 4 evaluates the performance of the proposed framework under diﬀerent demand patterns and demonstrates
the beneﬁts of incorporating queue-jumping behavior, the rolling horizon approach, and the event-triggered scheme. The proposed
ADP approach is also compared against several baseline methods, while a sensitivity analysis is conducted to examine the robustness
of the framework under zone partitioning and driver compliance rates. Finally, Section 5 concludes the study and outlines potential
directions for future research.

2. Related work

2.1. Customer participation and heterogeneity

    Customer participation and customer heterogeneity have received increasing attention in ride-sourcing pricing studies. Yang et al.
(2020) integrated a reward scheme with surge pricing, where each customer is assumed to have a balance account. Customers pay an
additional fee during peak periods and use the accumulated balance to subsidize trips during oﬀ-peak periods. However, customers do
not explicitly decide whether to participate in the additional payment mechanism, despite the fact that participation is closely related
to platform service quality (Stokkink et al., 2025). In contrast, auction-based approaches have been studied as a way to incorporate
customer participation in pricing and service allocation (Karamanis et al., 2020; Buchholz et al., 2025). These mechanisms provide
customers with explicit interaction through bidding, allowing them to inﬂuence service outcomes. However, these approaches rely on
strategic bidding and active customer participation, increasing implementation complexity and limiting their practicality in real-time
ride-sourcing systems. Moreover, bidding-based mechanisms may reduce pricing transparency because service outcomes depend on
competing bids rather than posted prices.
    Customers inherently exhibit substantial heterogeneity in their VOT and WTP. Eﬀective pricing strategies should price rides
according to complex underlying demand functions with heterogeneous customers and detect non-stationary behavior (Abkarian and
Mahmassani, 2024). Zhang et al. (2018) evaluated diﬀerent regulatory policies for a monopoly public transit service with passengers
having heterogeneous VOT and WTP. Wu et al. (2025) introduced a heterogeneous VOT distribution to design optimal pricing for
passenger choices between solo and pooled rides. In the context of ride-sourcing, when customers have the option to pay queue-
jumping premiums based on their VOT and WTP, two key issues remain understudied: how to model such queue-jumping behavior,
which is often observed in real-world scenarios, and how to design dynamic pricing and premiums to accommodate heterogeneous
customer behaviors.

2.2. Demand-side modeling and pricing strategies

    Static pricing, dynamic pricing, and subsidy strategies have been widely studied as demand regulation mechanisms in ride-sourcing
systems. Wang et al. (2016) modeled the ride-sourcing market using an aggregate static pricing approach and examined the existence
and stability of market equilibria. Subsequent studies further investigated static pricing under diﬀerent optimization objectives,
including maximizing platform revenue, social welfare, and throughput (Fang et al., 2019; Banerjee et al., 2022). However, static
pricing requires comprehensive knowledge of the system and cannot eﬀectively capture the spatial-temporal dynamics of demand and
supply. In contrast, dynamic pricing has been shown to oﬀer signiﬁcant advantages over static pricing, particularly in nonstationary

                                                                   3
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                             Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895


environments (Chen et al., 2024). It is more robust to ﬂuctuations in system parameters (Banerjee et al., 2015) and eﬀective in
promoting spatial-temporal equilibrium. A representative example is surge pricing during peak periods, which serves to reallocate
supply in response to rising demand (Cohen et al., 2016). Moreover, Castillo et al. (2017) highlighted the role of surge pricing in
mitigating the “Wild Goose Chase” (WGC) phenomenon, in which drivers are matched with distant passengers, resulting in longer
passenger waiting times and lower driver availability.
    In the context of dynamic pricing, Zha et al. (2018) developed a spatial pricing model based on the intra-zone matching assumption,
which enables zone-speciﬁc pricing but falls short in capturing the spatial heterogeneity of supply and demand across diﬀerent
regions. Tang et al. (2022) subsequently investigated optimal spatial pricing using a bi-level optimization framework, where the
platform determines spatially diﬀerentiated prices in the upper level while solving trip distribution among zones in the lower level.
To account for spatial imbalances and temporal variations in supply and demand, Yan et al. (2020) introduced a dynamic waiting
pool-matching mechanism integrated with dynamic pricing to reduce price volatility and improve social welfare. Ma et al. (2022)
proposed a spatial-temporal pricing mechanism that achieves incentive alignment by making driver trip acceptance a subgame-perfect
equilibrium strategy, thereby improving social welfare and earning equity. Xu et al. (2022) examined dynamic pricing strategies with
a time-dependent matching model that explicitly incorporates order cancellation behavior. Dynamic pricing has also been integrated
with various incentive mechanisms, such as customer reward schemes (Yang et al., 2020) and driver wage optimization (Bai et al.,
2019). To capture the impact of dynamic pricing on travel demand, existing studies typically model demand as an aggregate elastic
function of travel cost, for example, using the Inverse Product Diﬀerentiation Logit model (Gómez-Lobo et al., 2022). However, such
formulations generally overlook individual customer heterogeneity in the decision-making process. Moreover, they typically assume
that demand is either immediately matched or permanently lost within each decision period, ignoring customers who are willing to
remain in the matching queue. In practice, customers may choose to wait based on their individual trade-oﬀs between travel time and
cost (Wu et al., 2025). Modeling these inter-temporal queueing dynamics is essential for accurately characterizing customer behavior
under dynamic pricing, yet remains largely unexplored in the existing literature.


2.3. Joint pricing and vehicle operations

    For the two-sided ride-sourcing market, the platform can alleviate supply-demand disequilibrium via vehicle dispatching and
relocation. Lei et al. (2020) proposed a bi-level mathematical program with equilibrium constraints, optimizing path-based pricing


                           Table 1
                           Nomenclature.
                               Variable      Description

                            System setting

                                  𝕋          Simulation horizon set: 𝑡 ∈ 𝕋 = {0, 1, 2, … , 𝑇 − 1}
                                  𝑇          Number of periods in the simulation horizon
                                  𝛿𝑡         Decision interval
                                  𝑡𝑝         Planning horizon
                                  𝑍          Zone set: 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑍
                                  𝑁          Node set: 𝑙 ∈ 𝑁
                                  𝐸          Edge set

                             Demand side

                                    ℂ        Customer set: 𝑐 ∈ ℂ
                                 𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡      Price multiplier for OD(𝑖, 𝑗) at time 𝑡
                                 𝑏𝑖,𝑗,𝑡      Base fare for OD(𝑖, 𝑗) at time 𝑡
                                 𝑝𝑖,𝑗,𝑡      Trip fare for OD(𝑖, 𝑗) at time 𝑡
                                 𝑢𝑖,𝑗,𝑡      Queue-jumping premium for OD(𝑖, 𝑗) at time 𝑡
                                 ℎ𝑖,𝑗,𝑡      Estimated waiting time for OD(𝑖, 𝑗) at time 𝑡
                                 𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡      Reserved demand rate for OD(𝑖, 𝑗) at time 𝑡
                                    𝑞
                                 𝑔𝑖,𝑗,𝑡      Total cost including trip fare and queue-jumping premium for OD(𝑖, 𝑗) at time 𝑡
                                  𝑔𝑐𝑤        Generalized cost including trip fare and waiting time cost for customer 𝑐
                                 𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡      Total number of customers with OD(𝑖, 𝑗) at time 𝑡
                                 𝑛̂ 𝑖,𝑗,𝑡    Number of newly arriving customers with OD(𝑖, 𝑗) at time 𝑡
                                   𝑣𝑐        Customer’s value of time (VOT)
                                  𝑤𝑐         Customer’s willingness to pay (WTP)

                              Supply side

                                   ℚ         Vehicle set: 𝑞 ∈ ℚ
                                    𝑒        Travel cost per unit time
                                  𝑚𝑖,𝑡       Number of idle vehicles in zone 𝑖 at time 𝑡
                                  𝜏𝑜,𝑑       Base travel time from origin 𝑜 to destination 𝑑
                                 𝜏̂𝑜,𝑑,𝑡     Estimated travel time from origin 𝑜 to destination 𝑑 at departure time 𝑡
                                 𝐿𝑜,𝑑        Link-based distance between origin 𝑜 and destination 𝑑
                                 𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡      Dispatching status of vehicle 𝑞 with customer 𝑐 at time 𝑡
                                 𝑦𝑞,𝑙,𝑡      Relocation status of vehicle 𝑞 relocated to node 𝑙 at time 𝑡


                                                                            4
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895


and vehicle dispatching in the upper level while modeling travelers’ equilibrium path choices in the lower level, and solved the
problem using ADP. Chen et al. (2019) simultaneously optimized pricing and dispatch strategies using contextual bandits and temporal
diﬀerence learning, while Zhang et al. (2024) further extended this framework by incorporating vehicle repositioning and solving the
problem using contextual bandits and multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. Sun et al. (2024) formulated the interactions among
vehicle dispatching, service pricing, and customer demand as a two-stage Stackelberg game under both independent and competitive
pricing schemes. Zhang et al. (2025) further integrated re-dispatching and pricing strategies to optimize short-term revenue while
strategically determining ﬂeet size and initial vehicle allocation to enhance long-term system welfare. These studies demonstrate the
beneﬁts of jointly optimizing pricing and vehicle operations for improving system performance. However, they generally focus on
integrated optimization frameworks without explicitly investigating how the spatial granularity of pricing and vehicle operations
aﬀects system performance.
    To further improve system performance, recent studies have investigated the spatial granularity of pricing and vehicle operations.
Bimpikis et al. (2019) proposed a time-invariant equilibrium model to examine spatial price discrimination. Shi et al. (2022) designed a
multi-region dynamic pricing algorithm to set diﬀerentiated unit prices for diﬀerent non-overlapping regions. Lei and Ukkusuri (2023)
developed an enhanced twin-delayed deep determinant policy gradient (TD3) RL algorithm for pricing zones ranging from small grid
networks to the New York City (NYC) network. Notably, the majority of zone-based pricing schemes adopt an origin-based pricing
strategy, where prices are determined solely by the customer’s departure zone. While origin-based pricing ensures consistency for trips
from the same location, it fails to account for trip distance and destination attractiveness, resulting in homogeneous pricing across
diﬀerent origin-destination (OD) pairs and limiting its eﬀectiveness in demand management. In contrast, OD-based pricing enables
diﬀerentiated fare regulation based on both trip origins and destinations, thereby better capturing OD-speciﬁc demand and facilitating
long-term supply balancing. Meanwhile, existing studies commonly perform driver-customer matching at the regional scale (Beojone
et al., 2024), whereas link-node-level modeling provides much ﬁner spatial granularity for real-time routing and dispatching (Garg and
Ranu, 2018; Zhou et al., 2020; Yu and Shen, 2020; Liang et al., 2021). To bridge this spatial mismatch, Huang et al. (2024) proposed
a bi-level framework integrating link-node-level vehicle route guidance with regional vehicle relocation. These studies demonstrate
the eﬀectiveness of jointly optimizing pricing and vehicle operations for improving ride-sourcing system performance. However, most
existing approaches either optimize pricing and vehicle operations at the same spatial scale or perform vehicle matching at a coarse
regional level, making it diﬃcult to simultaneously exploit OD-level demand information and ﬁne-grained link-node-level operational
ﬂexibility.

3. Problem description

    To facilitate readers’ understanding, Table 1 presents some critical variable notations used throughout the paper.

3.1. Basic settings

     To better illustrate the proposed framework, Fig. 2 compares the conventional ride-sourcing framework with the proposed one. In
the conventional framework (Fig. 2a), customers submit trip requests to the platform and receive fare quotes and estimated waiting
times, based on which they decide whether to accept and join the matching queue. The platform continuously monitors vehicle
availability and subsequently dispatches vehicles to matched customers while relocating idle vehicles to balance supply and demand.
Pricing, dispatching, and relocation are typically performed at a uniform spatial granularity, making zone-based decisions too coarse
to support ﬁne-grained vehicle operations. In contrast, the proposed framework (Fig. 2b) integrates an OD-based dynamic pricing
scheme with a queue-jumping mechanism, which determines trip fares and queue-jumping premiums for each OD pair. Customers
exhibit heterogeneous VOT and WTP, inﬂuencing their choices to either wait in the regular queue or pay a premium for priority
matching. Meanwhile, vehicle dispatching and relocation decisions are formulated at the link-node level, enhancing the granularity
and realism of vehicle operations.
     Speciﬁcally, we consider a monopolistic ride-sourcing platform operating a ﬂeet of fully controlled vehicles over a simulation
horizon 𝕋 = {0, 1, 2, … , 𝑇 − 1}. The platform serves an urban region 𝑍 partitioned into several zones, and operates on a road network
represented by a set of nodes (road intersections) 𝑁 and a set of edges (road links) 𝐸. During each decision interval, newly generated
customer requests are collected by the platform, and the demand forecasting module predicts future travel demand based on both
these requests and the current system state. Let 𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 denote the total number of customers with OD pair (𝑖, 𝑗) present in the system at
time 𝑡, including both newly arriving potential customers 𝑛̂ 𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 and those carried over from previous intervals, regardless of whether
they choose to wait or jump the queue. Let 𝑚𝑖,𝑡 denote the number of idle vehicles in zone 𝑖 at time 𝑡. At each decision epoch,
the platform determines whether to enable the queue-jumping mechanism according to the current and predicted supply-demand
conditions. If enabled, customers are oﬀered diﬀerent priority levels with corresponding queue-jumping premiums. Note that the zone
partition is used to characterize local supply-demand conditions, while the pricing decisions (i.e., the trip fare and queue-jumping
premium) are determined at the OD level.
     Customers submit their requests through the ride-sourcing app and receive the trip fare 𝑝𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 and the estimated waiting time ℎ𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
from the platform. Upon accepting the quoted fare, they enter the matching queue and wait to be paired with an idle driver. Each
customer is characterized by an individual VOT 𝑣𝑐 and WTP 𝑤𝑐 , representing the monetary value assigned to travel time and the
maximum fare they are willing to pay, respectively. Customers with higher VOT are more likely to pay the queue-jumping premium
𝑢𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 to obtain higher matching priority and shorter expected waiting time, while those with lower VOT tend to wait until they are
matched, their request times out, or they abandon the trip. Let 𝑔𝑐𝑤 denote the generalized cost comprising the trip fare and waiting time

                                                                   5
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                     Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895




                             Fig. 2. Comparison of conventional and proposed ride-sourcing platform frameworks.




            𝑞
cost, and 𝑔𝑖,𝑗,𝑡  denote the total fare including the queue-jumping premium. Customers make their reservation decisions by comparing
                                                       𝑞
their WTP 𝑤𝑐 with the generalized costs 𝑔𝑐𝑤 and 𝑔𝑖,𝑗,𝑡   . This decision-making process is modeled by an integral demand function, which
determines the reservation demand rate 𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 under the given pricing decisions. Accordingly, among the newly arriving potential
demand 𝑛̂ 𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 , only a proportion 𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 is retained by the platform, resulting in the reserved demand of 𝑛̂ 𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 . Customers who are
not matched immediately remain in the system and are carried over to subsequent decision intervals until their individual waiting
tolerance is exceeded, after which they leave the system without being served.
    Once customer demand has been determined, the platform dispatches vehicles to matched customers and relocates idle vehicles
to better balance future supply and demand. The dispatching decision 𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡 indicates whether vehicle 𝑞 is assigned to customer 𝑐, and
the relocation decision 𝑦𝑞,𝑙,𝑡 indicates whether vehicle 𝑞 is relocated to node 𝑙.

                                                                      6
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                            Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895




                                                         Fig. 3. Workﬂow of the proposed framework.


    Fig. 3 illustrates the workﬂow of the proposed framework, which integrates dynamic pricing with vehicle dispatching and relo-
cation in a closed loop. Customer heterogeneity in terms of VOT and WTP is incorporated through an integral demand formulation.
On the demand side, the platform determines optimal pricing decisions to regulate incoming demand and maximize proﬁts based on
the current system state, represented by the number of potential customers and idle vehicles. The resulting regulated demand and
corresponding trip fares are then passed as inputs to the supply side for vehicle-customer matching. On the supply side, the platform
optimizes dispatching and relocation decisions to maximize long-term cumulative proﬁt leveraging ADP. Speciﬁcally, idle vehicles
are dispatched to waiting customers according to real-time supply-demand conditions, while idle vehicles are proactively relocated
to anticipated high demand areas to improve system eﬃciency. The system state is then updated and fed back to the demand side as
input for the next pricing decision, thereby forming a closed-loop interaction between demand regulation and supply optimization.

3.2. Demand side

    The customer set is denoted by ℂ. Each customer request is represented by a tuple 𝑐 = (𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑡𝑐 , ℎ𝑐 , 𝑣𝑐 , 𝑤𝑐 ), where 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑍 denote
the origin and destination zones, 𝑡𝑐 ∈ 𝕋 denotes the request time, ℎ𝑐 denotes the maximum waiting time tolerated by the customer,
𝑣𝑐 and 𝑤𝑐 are the customer’s VOT and WTP. Customer requests arriving during the interval [𝑡, 𝑡 + 1) are aggregated and processed at
time 𝑡. Each customer may either abandon the request or wait for several decision intervals until being matched or timing out.

3.2.1. Pricing mechanism
      For each OD pair (𝑖, 𝑗) at time 𝑡, the platform determines the trip fare 𝑝𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 , which is calculated as the product of the price multiplier
𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 and the base fare 𝑏𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 . The base fare is determined according to the estimated travel time of the trip, which is consistent with
the fare structure familiar to most customers.
             𝑝𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ⋅ 𝑏𝑖,𝑗,𝑡                                                                                                                (1a)
        𝛾𝑚𝑖𝑛 ≤𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ≤ 𝛾𝑚𝑎𝑥                                                                                                                          (1b)
where (1b) speciﬁes the feasible range of the price multiplier.
   In addition to the monetary cost, customers also consider the time cost associated with waiting. The waiting time for each OD
pair is estimated by a neural network (NN), denoted by 𝑓Ω (⋅), which captures the nonlinear supply-demand interactions:
                             ∑
                   (           𝑗 𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
        ℎ𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = 𝑓Ω 𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑡,            )                                                                                     (2)
                              𝑚𝑖,𝑡
         ∑
             𝑗 𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
where        𝑚𝑖,𝑡
                        denotes the demand-to-supply ratio in zone 𝑖 at time 𝑡, 𝑚𝑖,𝑡 is the number of idle vehicles in zone 𝑖, and 𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 is the total
number of customers with OD pair (𝑖, 𝑗) in the system at time 𝑡, including both newly arriving customers and those carried over from
previous decision intervals. Customers characterized by their VOT and WTP (𝑣𝑐 , 𝑤𝑐 ) compare the generalized costs under regular
service and queue jumping to determine whether to conﬁrm the order. The set of reserved customers is deﬁned as
             {                                                               }
                                        𝑞
         Θ = (𝑣𝑐 , 𝑤𝑐 )|𝑤𝑐 ≥ min(𝑔𝑐𝑤 , 𝑔𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ), 0 ≤ 𝑤𝑐 ≤ 𝑤̄𝑐 , 0 ≤ 𝑣𝑐 ≤ 𝑣̄𝑐                                                     (3a)

          𝑔𝑐𝑤 = 𝑝𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝑣𝑐 ⋅ ℎ𝑖,𝑗,𝑡                                                                                                                 (3b)
         𝑞
        𝑔𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = 𝑝𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑗,𝑡                                                                                                                     (3c)
         𝑢𝑚𝑖𝑛 ≤ 𝑢𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ≤ 𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑥                                                                                                                        (3d)
where (3b) deﬁnes the generalized cost under regular service as the sum of the trip fare and the waiting cost 𝑣𝑐 ⋅ ℎ𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 , (3c) deﬁnes the
total cost under queue-jumping service as the sum of the trip fare and the queue-jumping premium 𝑢𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 , and (3d) speciﬁes the feasible

                                                                              7
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                                        Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895




                                                                        Fig. 4. Market segment in the VOT-WTP space.


range of the queue-jumping premium. The queue-jumping premium is interpreted as a payment for priority matching rather than
immediate service, since premium customers may still experience a short waiting time. Instead, the premium implicitly represents
the expected reduction in waiting disutility resulting from higher matching priority. Therefore, waiting time savings are not modeled
as a separate cost component to avoid double counting.
    Depending on the supply-demand conditions, two scenarios are considered. Note that the total customer demand considered by the
platform, 𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 , comprises both newly arriving demand 𝑛̂ 𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 and carry-over demand retained from previous decision intervals. When
                                                                                                 ∑
the total customer demand originating from zone 𝑖 exceeds the available vehicle supply, i.e., 𝑗 𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 > 𝑚𝑖,𝑡 , the platform enables the
queue-jumping option, corresponding to the high demand scenario. Otherwise, the queue-jumping option is disabled, corresponding
to the medium to low demand scenario.
    In high demand scenarios, the platform introduces a queue-jumping premium to diﬀerentiate customer choices. Under the opti-
mized premium, the market is segmented into three groups, as illustrated in Fig. 4a. Customers in the blue region choose to wait,
preferring to incur the time cost over the queue-jumping premium. Customers in the green region choose the queue-jumping service
                                                                                                                                𝑞
by paying the premium to avoid the higher waiting cost. The boundary between these two groups is deﬁned by 𝑔𝑐𝑤 = 𝑔𝑖,𝑗,𝑡           , corre-
sponding to customers with 𝑣𝑐 = 𝑢𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ∕ℎ𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 , for whom the waiting cost equals the queue-jumping premium. Finally, customers in the
gray region ﬁnd both options unacceptable and abandon their travel demand. Let 𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡   𝑤 and 𝑑 𝑞
                                                                                                𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 denote the proportions of customers
choosing regular waiting and queue jumping, respectively, with total reserved demand given by 𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = 𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡  𝑤 + 𝑑 𝑞 . We assume that
                                                                                                                     𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
the total fare, including the queue-jumping premium, does not exceed the maximum WTP, i.e., 0 ≤ 𝑢𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ≤ 𝑤̄ 𝑐 − 𝑝𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 . This excludes
pricing strategies in which no customers would choose the queue-jumping service, thereby restricting the optimization to practically
meaningful solutions. It follows that
                     𝑖,𝑗,𝑡      𝑢
                    ℎ𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
                              𝑤̄𝑐
         𝑤
        𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 =                  (𝑣𝑐 , 𝑤𝑐 ) d𝑤𝑐 d𝑣𝑐                                                                                                            (4a)
                 ∫0        ∫𝑔 𝑤
                             𝑐
                            𝑣̄𝑐            𝑤̄𝑐
         𝑞
        𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 =                                  (𝑣𝑐 , 𝑤𝑐 ) d𝑤𝑐 d𝑣𝑐                                                                                            (4b)
                      ∫ 𝑢𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ∫𝑔𝑞
                          ℎ𝑖,𝑗,𝑡          𝑖,𝑗,𝑡

   Waiting customers pay the regular fare, whereas queue-jumping customers are charged an additional premium. The platform’s
objective of maximizing the proﬁt generated from the reserved demand at time 𝑡 is formulated as
              ∑[            (
                                                𝑞        𝑞
                                                               )]
                              𝑤
        max       𝑛̂ 𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ⋅ 𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ⋅ 𝑝𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ⋅ 𝑔𝑖,𝑗,𝑡                                                           (5)
        𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 , 𝑢𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
                          𝑖,𝑗

        𝑠.𝑡. (1𝑎), (1𝑏), (2), (3𝑏) − (3𝑑), (4𝑎), (4𝑏)
                                             ∑
   In medium to low demand scenarios, i.e., 𝑗 𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ≤ 𝑚𝑖,𝑡 , the platform disables the queue-jumping option and oﬀers only regular
service. Consequently, all customers pay regular fares. As illustrated in Fig. 4b, the market segmentation is simpliﬁed accordingly:
                                                         𝑤 , while the queue-jumping demand 𝑑 𝑞 = 0. Therefore,
the reserved demand consists solely of waiting demand 𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡                                     𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
                            𝑣̄𝑐        𝑤̄𝑐
         𝑤
        𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 =                              (𝑣𝑐 , 𝑤𝑐 ) d𝑤𝑐 d𝑣𝑐                                                                                                (6a)
                      ∫0            ∫𝑔 𝑤
                                      𝑐
         𝑞
        𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 =0                                                                                                                                                (6b)
    Accordingly, the objective function in (5) is simpliﬁed to
           ∑
                           𝑤
       max    (𝑛̂ 𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ⋅ 𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ⋅ 𝑝𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 )                                                                                                                        (7)
         𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
                   𝑖,𝑗

        𝑠.𝑡. (1𝑎), (1𝑏), (2), (3𝑏), (3𝑑), (6𝑎), (6𝑏)

3.2.2. Rolling horizon approach and event-triggered scheme
   The objective functions in (5) and (7) are formulated under a myopic planning approach, considering only the proﬁt of the current
decision epoch. However, such a myopic strategy may result in suboptimal decisions. For example, during a temporary demand surge,

                                                                                             8
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                                              Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895




                                                                Fig. 5. Illustration of the rolling horizon approach.


the platform may impose high prices to maximize immediate revenue. If the surge is short-lived, this strategy may discourage demand
reservations and reduce the platform’s long-term proﬁt. To overcome this limitation, we adopt a rolling horizon approach (see Fig. 5).
The key idea is to balance responsiveness with anticipation by updating decisions at short intervals of 𝛿𝑡 (e.g., 30 s) while optimizing
over a longer planning horizon 𝑡𝑝 (e.g., 5 min). The planning horizon should be suﬃciently long to capture short-term variations in
supply and demand, yet short enough to limit forecasting uncertainty.
    To support the rolling horizon framework, we incorporate a data-driven short-term forecasting module to predict near-future
demand over the planning horizon. Rather than assuming perfect foresight, the platform infers future demand from historical obser-
vations. Speciﬁcally, customer requests are aggregated at the OD level and organized into temporal sequences, where each observation
represents the total demand within a rolling time interval. These sequences are used to train a recurrent neural network (RNN)-based
predictor that maps recent demand trajectories to future OD demand over the planning horizon, capturing both temporal patterns
(e.g., peak and oﬀ-peak demand) and spatial correlations. At each decision epoch, the platform updates the input sequence with the
most recent observations and feeds it into the trained RNN model. The resulting multi-step demand forecasts replace the unknown
future demand in the optimization model and serve as inputs to the pricing, dispatching, and relocation decisions. This forecast-
ing module enables the platform to anticipate short-term demand ﬂuctuations and make forward-looking decisions under demand
uncertainty.
    Accordingly, the waiting time expression in (2) is updated as
                                                     𝑡
                    ⎛         ∑            ∑𝑡+ 𝛿𝑡𝑝 ∑            ⎞
                    ⎜           𝑗 𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 +    𝜏=𝑡+1  𝑗 𝑛̂ 𝑖,𝑗,𝜏 ⎟
        ℎ𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = 𝑓𝜃 ⎜𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑡,                𝑡                  ⎟                                                                                                        (8)
                    ⎜                   ∑𝑡+ 𝛿𝑡𝑝                 ⎟
                    ⎝                      𝜏=𝑡 𝑚𝑖,𝜏             ⎠
                      𝑡
              ∑𝑡+ 𝛿𝑡𝑝
where 𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜏=𝑡+1  𝑛̂ 𝑖,𝑗,𝜏 represents the total customer demand with OD (𝑖, 𝑗) over the planning horizon, including the current demand
and the forecasted arrivals.
   Under the rolling horizon framework, whether the queue-jumping option is enabled is determined using the predicted supply-
demand condition over the planning horizon. Speciﬁcally, the platform enables the queue-jumping option when the predicted total
                                                                     𝑡                      𝑡
                                                         ∑       ∑𝑡+ 𝛿𝑡𝑝 ∑              ∑𝑡+ 𝛿𝑡𝑝
demand exceeds the available vehicle supply, i.e., 𝑗 𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜏=𝑡+1        𝑗 𝑛̂ 𝑖,𝑗,𝜏 >  𝜏=𝑡 𝑚𝑖,𝜏 , corresponding to the high demand scenario.
Otherwise, the queue-jumping option is disabled, corresponding to the medium to low demand scenario. For high demand scenarios,
the rolling horizon pricing problem that maximizes the total proﬁt from reserved demand is formulated as
                                                               𝑡𝑝
                                        ∑ [(                                   )(                                       )]
                                                            𝑡+ 𝛿𝑡
                                                             ∑                                         𝑞        𝑞
          ∗
        (𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 , 𝑢∗𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ) = arg max            𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 +           𝑛̂ 𝑖,𝑗,𝜏         𝑤
                                                                                    𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ⋅ 𝑝𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ⋅ 𝑔𝑖,𝑗,𝑡                                                    (9)
                          𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 , 𝑢𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 𝑖,𝑗               𝜏=𝑡+1

        𝑠.𝑡. (1𝑎), (1𝑏), (3𝑏) − (3𝑑), (4𝑎), (4𝑏), (8)
       ∗ and 𝑢∗
where 𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡  𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 denote the optimal pricing decisions at time 𝑡.
  For medium to low demand scenarios, the corresponding rolling horizon pricing problem is formulated as
                                                    𝑡𝑝
                            ∑ [(                                 )                ]
                                                 𝑡+ 𝛿𝑡
                                                 ∑
         ∗                                                         𝑤
        𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = arg max              𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 +           𝑛̂ 𝑖,𝑗,𝜏 𝑑𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ⋅ 𝑝𝑖,𝑗,𝑡                                                                                      (10)
                   𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 𝑖,𝑗                    𝜏=𝑡+1

        𝑠.𝑡. (1𝑎), (1𝑏), (3𝑏), (3𝑑), (6𝑎), (6𝑏), (8)

   Solving the pricing problems (9) and (10) at every decision epoch can be computationally expensive. Moreover, frequent opti-
mization may cause prices to ﬂuctuate substantially in response to short-term supply-demand variations, leading to market instability

                                                                                                        9
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                                        Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895




                                                                 Fig. 6. Illustration of the event-triggered scheme.



that is undesirable for both drivers and customers. To address these concerns, an event-triggered scheme (see Fig. 6) is adopted, under
which pricing decisions are updated only when the supply-demand condition changes signiﬁcantly. An increase or decrease in the
supply-demand condition is regarded as an event, and its magnitude is measured by the threshold parameter 𝜂.      ̄ Let 𝜂𝑖,𝑡 denote the
supply-demand change in zone 𝑖 at time 𝑡.
                   (∑                         𝑡
                                       ∑𝑡+ 𝛿𝑡𝑝 ∑               ) ( ∑𝑡+ 𝑡𝑝    )
                                                                       𝛿𝑡
                          𝑗 𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 +     𝜏=𝑡+1    𝑗 𝑛̂ 𝑖,𝑗,𝜏    ∕   𝜏=𝑡 𝑚𝑖,𝜏
        𝜂𝑖,𝑡 = (                          𝑡                  ) ( ∑𝑡+ 𝑡𝑝 −1      )                                                                                (11)
                   ∑                  ∑𝑡+ 𝛿𝑡𝑝 −1 ∑                   𝛿𝑡
                       𝑗 𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−1 +     𝜏=𝑡        𝑗 ̂
                                                     𝑛 𝑖,𝑗,𝜏  ∕   𝜏=𝑡−1
                                                                           𝑚𝑖,𝜏

                                                                                                                𝑡
where 𝜂𝑖,𝑡 is deﬁned as the demand-to-supply ratio over the planning horizon [𝑡, 𝑡 + 𝛿𝑡𝑝 ] divided by that over the previous planning
                         𝑡𝑝
horizon [𝑡 − 1, 𝑡 + 𝛿𝑡 − 1].
   Note that (10) is a special case of (9) with 𝑢∗𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = 0. Accordingly, the optimal pricing decisions under the event-triggered scheme
are given by
                                {
          ∗
                                 (𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−1 , 𝑢𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−1 ), if 1𝜂̄ ≤ 𝜂𝑖,𝑡 ≤ 𝜂̄
       (̃𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 , 𝑢̃ ∗𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ) =                                                                                                      (12)
                                   ∗ , 𝑢∗ ),
                                 (𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡                 otherwise
                                           𝑖,𝑗,𝑡

(12) indicates that pricing decisions are retained from the previous decision epoch when the change in the supply-demand condition
falls within the predeﬁned threshold range. Otherwise, the pricing optimization problem is re-solved, and the updated pricing decisions
are implemented.
    The objective functions in (9) and (10) involve demand rates expressed as double integrals, making the optimization problems
highly nonlinear and non-convex. To address this computational challenge, a discrete approximation scheme is adopted. Speciﬁcally,
the continuous VOT-WTP space is partitioned into a ﬁnite number of small grids, each representing a subregion of the joint probability
density. The double integrals are approximated by summing the weighted probabilities over these grids, thereby obtaining estimates
of the demand rates. The price multiplier 𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 and queue-jumping premium 𝑢𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 are discretized into ﬁnite levels within their respective
feasible ranges. The demand rates and objective value are evaluated for each resulting pricing combination, and the combination that
maximizes the proﬁt is selected as the optimal pricing strategy.


3.3. Supply side

    To provide a clearer illustration of the supply-side decisions, the customer sets are deﬁned as follows.

           ℂ𝑡 = ℂ𝑤
                 𝑡−1
                     ∪ ℂ𝑞𝑡−1 ∪ ℂ𝑤
                                𝑡 ∪ ℂ𝑡
                                        𝑞
                                                                                                                                                                (13a)
                {                                                  }
                                                     𝑞
         ℂ𝑤                           𝑤
            𝑡 = 𝑐 ∶ 𝑡 − 1 < 𝑡𝑐 ≤ 𝑡, 𝑔𝑐 ≤ 𝑤𝑐 ≤ 𝑔𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 , 𝑐 ∈ ℂ𝑡
                                                               𝑛𝑒𝑤
                                                                                                                                                                (13b)
                {                                                  }
                                      𝑞
          ℂ𝑞𝑡 = 𝑐 ∶ 𝑡 − 1 < 𝑡𝑐 ≤ 𝑡, 𝑔𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ≤ 𝑤𝑐 < 𝑔𝑐𝑤 , 𝑐 ∈ ℂ𝑛𝑒𝑤
                                                               𝑡                                                                                                (13c)
                {                                                                 }
                                                            𝑞
        ℂ𝑤𝑡−1
              = 𝑐 ∶ 𝑡𝑐 ≤ 𝑡 − 1, 𝑡 ≤ 𝑡𝑐 + ℎ𝑐 , 𝑔𝑐𝑤 ≤ 𝑤𝑐 ≤ 𝑔𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 , 𝑐 ∈ ℂ𝑡−1 ⧵ ℂ𝑚
                                                                              𝑡−1
                                                                                                                                                               (13d)
                {                                                                 }
                                                𝑞
        ℂ𝑞𝑡−1 = 𝑐 ∶ 𝑡𝑐 ≤ 𝑡 − 1, 𝑡 ≤ 𝑡𝑐 + ℎ𝑐 , 𝑔𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ≤ 𝑤𝑐 < 𝑔𝑐𝑤 , 𝑐 ∈ ℂ𝑡−1 ⧵ ℂ𝑚
                                                                              𝑡−1
                                                                                                                                                                (13e)
                                                                                                   𝑞
where (13a) indicates that the total customer set ℂ𝑡 at time 𝑡 cconsists of four subsets. ℂ𝑤𝑡 and ℂ𝑡 denote newly arriving customers
who choose to wait and jump the queue, respectively, based on the generalized cost (13b)-(13c). ℂ𝑛𝑒𝑤  𝑡   = {𝑐 ∶ 𝑡 − 1 < 𝑡𝑐 ≤ 𝑡} denotes
                                                              𝑞
the set of newly arriving potential customers. ℂ𝑤  𝑡−1
                                                       and  ℂ 𝑡−1
                                                                  denote the  waiting and queue-jumping  customers   from the previous
decision epoch whose reservations remain active at time 𝑡, respectively (13d)-(13e). ℂ𝑡−1 denotes the customer set at the previous
                                ∑
decision epoch, and ℂ𝑚𝑡−1
                          = {𝑐 ∶ 𝑞 𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡 = 1, 𝑐 ∈ ℂ𝑡−1 } denotes the set of customers matched in the previous decision epoch.

                                                                                         10
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                    Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895


Remark 1. Note that, in the proposed framework, customers who choose to jump the queue do not receive instantaneous service.
Instead, they are assigned to a priority queue that is served ahead of the regular waiting queue but remains constrained by limited
vehicle availability. When multiple customers choose the queue-jumping option within the same time period, congestion may arise
within the priority queue itself, and their waiting times are determined by the relative priority ordering and prevailing supply
conditions. Therefore, the queue-jumping mechanism aﬀects the service order and relative waiting times among customers, rather
than eliminating waiting altogether.
    Demand-side decisions regulate customer participation and priority levels within the queueing system. The resulting customer sets,
including both regular waiting and priority (queue-jumping) customers, are then passed to the supply-side module, where vehicle
dispatching and relocation decisions are carried out.

3.3.1. Dispatching and relocation decisions
     The vehicle set is denoted by ℚ. Each vehicle is represented by a tuple 𝑞 = (𝑜𝑞 , ℎ𝑞 ) ∈ ℚ, which indicates that the vehicle corresponds
to its current location and time. For an occupied vehicle, 𝑜𝑞 is the destination node and ℎ𝑞 is the estimated arrival time. Therefore,
(𝑜𝑞 , ℎ𝑞 ) represents the spatial-temporal point at which the vehicle becomes idle for future dispatching.
     Leveraging historical trip records, we develop a hybrid travel-time prediction model consisting of a physics-based baseline and a
                                                                                                                                         𝐿
neural-network correction module. Speciﬁcally, the baseline travel time is estimated using the distance-based formulation 𝜏𝑜,𝑑 = 𝑣𝑜,𝑑      ̄
                                                                                                                                             ,
where 𝑜 and 𝑑 denote the origin and destination coordinates, respectively, 𝐿𝑜,𝑑 is the network distance between them, and 𝑣̄ is a
reference speed. A neural network 𝑓Δ (⋅) then learns a multiplicative correction from the input features (𝑡, 𝑜, 𝑑, 𝐿𝑜,𝑑 ), where 𝑡 denotes
the departure time. The resulting travel time estimate is
                          (                       )
          𝜏̂𝑜,𝑑,𝑡 = 𝜏𝑜,𝑑 ⋅ 1 + 𝑓Δ (𝑡, 𝑜, 𝑑, 𝐿𝑜,𝑑 )                                                                                       (14)
where 𝑓Δ (⋅) has a bounded output to ensure that the correction remains within a reasonable range. This hybrid formulation preserves
the physical relationship between travel distance and travel time while capturing complex spatial-temporal variations, such as time-
of-day eﬀects and traﬃc congestion, that are diﬃcult to model analytically.
    As vehicles are assumed to be fully controlled by the platform, the decision over the supply side contains the dispatching decision
𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡 and the relocation decision 𝑦𝑞,𝑙,𝑡 . Dispatching decision 𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡 indicates whether vehicle 𝑞 is assigned to customer 𝑐 at time 𝑡, which
is constrained by
         ∑
            𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡 ≤ 1                                                                                                                   (15a)
          𝑐
        ∑
              𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡 ≤ 1                                                                                                                    (15b)
          𝑞

              𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡 ∈ {0, 1}                                                                                                               (15c)
where (15a) ensures that each vehicle is assigned to at most one customer, (15b) ensures that each customer is matched to at most
one vehicle, and (15c) deﬁnes the binary dispatching decision. Speciﬁcally, 𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡 = 1 if vehicle 𝑞 is assigned to customer 𝑐 at time 𝑡,
and 𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡 = 0 otherwise.
   Relocation decision 𝑦𝑞,𝑙,𝑡 indicates whether vehicle 𝑞 is relocated to node 𝑙 at time 𝑡. For a vehicle 𝑞 ∈ ℚ, the decision is constrained
by
       ∑            ∑
           𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡 +   𝑦𝑞,𝑙,𝑡 ≤ 1                                                                                                       (16a)
          𝑐               𝑙

                              𝜏̂𝑜𝑞 ,𝑙,𝑡 ≤ 𝛿𝑡                                                                                                (16b)
                              𝑦𝑞,𝑙,𝑡 ∈ {0, 1}                                                                                               (16c)
where (16a) ensures that a vehicle is either assigned to a customer or relocated, (16b) requires the estimated travel time from the
vehicle’s current idle location 𝑜𝑞 to the relocation node 𝑙 to be no greater than one decision interval 𝛿𝑡, and (16c) deﬁnes the binary
relocation decision. Speciﬁcally, 𝑦𝑞,𝑙,𝑡 = 1 if vehicle 𝑞 is relocated to node 𝑙 at time 𝑡, and 𝑦𝑞,𝑙,𝑡 = 0 otherwise.
    The immediate proﬁt associated with each decision is deﬁned as
                    {
                     𝑝𝑐 − 𝑒 ⋅ 𝜏̂𝑜𝑞 ,𝑜𝑐 ,𝑡 , 𝑐 ∈ ℂ𝑤     𝑤
                                                 𝑡 ∪ ℂ𝑡−1
       𝑟(𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡 ) =   𝑞                          𝑞    𝑞                                                                           (17a)
                     𝑔𝑐 − 𝑒 ⋅ 𝜏̂𝑜𝑞 ,𝑜𝑐 ,𝑡 , 𝑐 ∈ ℂ𝑡 ∪ ℂ𝑡−1
         𝑟(𝑦𝑞,𝑙,𝑡 ) = −𝑒 ⋅ 𝜏̂𝑜𝑞 ,𝑙,𝑡                                                                                                        (17b)
where (17a) gives the proﬁt associated with a dispatching decision, calculated as the fare collected from customers minus the travel
cost incurred from the vehicle’s origin 𝑜𝑞 to the customer’s origin 𝑜𝑐 . The fare is either the regular trip fare 𝑝𝑐 for waiting customers
or the total fare 𝑔𝑐𝑞 for queue-jumping customers. Here, 𝑒 denotes the travel cost per unit time. (17b) gives the proﬁt associated with
a relocation decision, deﬁned as the negative travel cost incurred when a vehicle relocates from its origin 𝑜𝑞 to node 𝑙.
    The platform’s objective is to maximize the expected total proﬁt over the planning horizon
                  {                                          }
                      ∑(∑∑                    ∑∑           )
         max 𝔼                   𝑟(𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡 ) +    𝑟(𝑦𝑞,𝑙,𝑡 )                                                                           (18)
        𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡 , 𝑦𝑞,𝑙,𝑡
                              𝑡      𝑞    𝑐     𝑞   𝑙


                                                                     11
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                     Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895


   While dynamic programming is a standard approach for solving (18), it is challenging to apply it directly due to the curse of
dimensionality arising from the high-dimensional state and decision spaces. Therefore, we adopt an approximate dynamic program-
ming (ADP) framework (Powell, 2007; Liang et al., 2021), in which the value function in the Bellman equation is approximated
by a parameterized function learned from data. This enables eﬃcient policy learning for dispatching and relocation decisions while
maintaining computational tractability. We next formulate the ADP model by deﬁning the state, decision variables, state transition,
and objective function.
   State The state at time 𝑡 is represented by the vehicle’s spatial-temporal information
         𝑠𝑡 = (𝑜𝑞 , ℎ𝑞 )                                                                                                                      (19)
    Decision The decision at time 𝑡 consists of dispatching and relocation actions
         𝑎𝑡 = (𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡 , 𝑦𝑞,𝑙,𝑡 )                                                                                                              (20)
where the dispatching assigns idle vehicles to customers to eﬃciently match supply and demand while minimizing service delays,
whereas the relocation action moves idle vehicles to better satisfy future spatial-temporal demand.
  State transition Given the dispatching and relocation decisions, the system state evolves according to
         𝑠𝑡+1 = 𝑀(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )                                                                                                                   (21)
    In principle, the state transition is governed by the conditional probability distribution ℙ(𝑠𝑡+1 | 𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ), which captures uncertainties
in travel times, demand realizations, and matching outcomes. However, explicitly modeling or estimating this transition distribution
is computationally intractable in large-scale network settings due to the high dimensionality and complex dependencies involved.
Instead, we adopt a data-driven transition model in which 𝑀(⋅) is implicitly learned from historical trip data and simulation. This
enables the proposed ADP framework to approximate the underlying stochastic dynamics without explicitly specifying the transition
probabilities, thereby improving computational tractability while preserving modeling ﬂexibility.
    Objective function Given the current state 𝑠𝑡 and decision 𝑎𝑡 , the platform receives an immediate reward 𝑟(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ), which represents
the proﬁt obtained from dispatching and relocation decisions. Under a policy 𝜋, the objective is to maximize the long-term cumulative
proﬁt in the planning horizon
                       [𝑇                | ]
                        ∑                |
          𝜋
        𝑉 (𝑠0 ) = 𝔼𝜋        𝑟(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) || 𝑠0                                                                                             (22)
                                         |
                        𝑡=0              |
    For an arbitrary state 𝑠𝑡 , the corresponding value function is deﬁned as
                       [𝑇                 | ]
                        ∑                 |
        𝑉 𝜋 (𝑠𝑡 ) = 𝔼𝜋      𝑟(𝑠𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) || 𝑠𝑡                                                                                             (23)
                                          |
                        𝑘=𝑡               |
    According to the Bellman optimality equation, the optimal value function satisﬁes
                         [                                      ]
        𝑉 ∗ (𝑠𝑡 ) = max 𝔼 𝑟(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) + 𝛼𝑉 ∗ (𝑠𝑡+1 ) || 𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡                                                                           (24)
                        𝑎𝑡

where 𝛼 is the discount factor. Equivalently,
                     [                                      ]
      𝑄(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) = 𝔼 𝑟(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) + 𝛼𝑉 ∗ (𝑠𝑡+1 ) || 𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡                                                                                   (25)
and the optimal policy is obtained by
         𝜋 ∗ (𝑠𝑡 ) = arg max 𝑄(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )                                                                                                      (26)
                             𝑎𝑡

    For the dispatching decision, the objective function can be expressed as
            ∑ ∑
       max         𝑄(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ⋅ 𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡                                                                                                       (27)
         𝑥𝑞,𝑐,𝑡
                  𝑞∈ℚ 𝑐∈ℂ𝑡

         𝑠.𝑡. (15𝑎) − (15𝑐)
    For the relocation decision, the objective function can be expressed as
            ∑∑
       max          𝑄(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ⋅ 𝑦𝑞,𝑙,𝑡                                                                                                      (28)
         𝑦𝑞,𝑙,𝑡
                  𝑞∈ℚ 𝑙∈𝑁

         𝑠.𝑡. (16𝑎) − (16𝑐)
    To mitigate the curse of dimensionality in dynamic programming, we employ value function approximation. Speciﬁcally, a neural
network is used to approximate the value function 𝑉 (𝑠𝑡 ) by 𝑉̂ (𝑠𝑡 | 𝜃), where 𝜃 denotes the neural network parameters. The network is
trained using temporal-diﬀerence (TD) learning:
          𝛿𝑡(𝑖) = 𝑟(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) + 𝛼 ⋅ 𝑉̂ (𝑠𝑡+1 | 𝜃) − 𝑉̂ (𝑠𝑡 | 𝜃)                                                                              (29a)
                    ( )
                  1 (𝑖) 2
         𝐿(𝜃) =       𝛿                                                                                                                      (29b)
                  2 𝑡
         𝜃𝑘+1 = 𝜃𝑘 − 𝛽 ⋅ ∇𝜃 ⋅ 𝐿(𝜃𝑘 )                                                                                                         (29c)

                                                                      12
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                    Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895


Algorithm 1 Dynamic pricing framework integrating vehicle dispatching and relocation decisions.
Input: Zone set 𝑍, customer set ℂ, vehicle set ℚ
 1: for each decision epoch 𝑡 ∈ 𝕋 do
 2:    Environment observe and state update:
 3:       Observe the current vehicle set ℚ𝑡 ∈ ℚ and newly arriving customer set ℂ𝑛𝑒𝑤      𝑡 , and update 𝑚𝑖,𝑡 , 𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
 4:    Pricing decision:
 5:       Predict the newly arriving customer demand 𝑛̂ 𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 over the planning horizon
 6:       Calculate 𝜂𝑖,𝑡 according to (11)
 7:       if 𝜂𝑖,𝑡 exceeds the predeﬁned event-triggered threshold range then
 8:          Estimate the waiting time ℎ𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 according to (8)
                               𝑡                      𝑡
                 ∑         ∑𝑡+ 𝛿𝑡𝑝 ∑              ∑𝑡+ 𝛿𝑡𝑝
 9:          if 𝑗 𝑛𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜏=𝑡+1     𝑗 𝑛̂ 𝑖,𝑗,𝜏 >  𝜏=𝑡 𝑚𝑖,𝜏 then                                                        ⊳ High demand scenario
                 Solve for the optimal pricing decision 𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡∗ , 𝑢∗
10:                                                                𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 according to (9)
11:          else                                                                                         ⊳ Medium/low demand scenario
12:              Solve for the optimal pricing decision 𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡∗ according to (10)

13:          end if
14:       else
15:          Use the pricing decision 𝛾𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−1 , 𝑢𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−1 from the previous decision epoch
16:       end if
17:     Demand update:
18:       Update the current reserved customer set ℂ𝑡 according to (13a)
19:     Dispatching decision:
20:       Solve for the optimal dispatching decision 𝑥∗𝑞,𝑐,𝑡 according to (27)
21:     Relocation decision:
22:       Solve for the optimal relocation decision 𝑦∗𝑞,𝑙,𝑡 according to (28)
23:     Environment update:
24:       Remove matched customers from ℂ𝑡 and update the vehicle status in ℚ𝑡
25: end for



where (29a) deﬁnes the TD error, (29b) is the corresponding loss function, and (29c) updates the neural network parameters using
gradient descent. Here, 𝛽 denotes the learning rate.
    Algorithm 1 summarizes the proposed dynamic pricing framework integrated with vehicle dispatching and relocation. At each
decision epoch, the platform ﬁrst observes the current system state, including vehicle states and newly arriving customer requests, and
updates zone-level supply-demand indicators. It then predicts customer demand over the planning horizon. Based on the predicted
demand, an event-triggered mechanism determines whether the pricing policy should be updated. When the trigger condition is
satisﬁed, the platform estimates expected waiting time and solves the corresponding pricing problem under either high demand or
medium to low demand scenarios. Otherwise, the pricing decisions from the previous decision epoch are retained to avoid excessive
price ﬂuctuations.
    Based on the pricing decisions, customer choices are updated accordingly, yielding the regulated customer set that serves as the
input to the subsequent operational layer. The platform then determines the dispatching and relocation decisions by solving the
corresponding optimization problems to maximize the expected long-term system proﬁt while satisfying the operational constraints.
Finally, the system state is updated by removing matched customers and updating vehicle states, and the process repeats in a rolling
horizon manner until the end of the operating period.




Fig. 7. Nodes and aggregated taxi OD zones in Manhattan. Adjacent taxi zones are merged into a single zone and represented by the same color.

                                                                     13
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                    Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895


4. Empirical study

4.1. Simulation environment

    The proposed framework is evaluated using a simulator built on the Manhattan road network, with historical taxi trip records from
June 2016 provided by the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission 1 . The dataset contains pickup and drop-oﬀ coordinates,
travel distance, travel time, and trip fare for each trip. The study area is partitioned into 8 zones by aggregating the original 263 taxi
zones, as illustrated in Fig. 7. Pickup and drop-oﬀ locations are mapped to their nearest nodes in the underlying road network, which
consists of 4486 nodes and 9755 links. A ﬂeet of 1000 vehicles is initially randomly distributed over the network. Each simulation
run starts at 00:00, while performance metrics are collected from 06:00 to 24:00 to mitigate cold-start eﬀects. Approximately 80,000
orders are observed during the evaluation period. Historical demand data from the ﬁrst 25 days are used to train the prediction and
decision-making modules of the proposed framework, whereas the remaining days are reserved for out-of-sample evaluation.
    Table 2 summarizes the neural network conﬁgurations used throughout the numerical experiments. Waiting time and travel
time are estimated using lightweight feedforward neural networks to enable eﬃcient training and inference. OD demand forecasting
employs an RNN-based model to capture temporal correlations in demand patterns. For the ADP-based dispatching and relocation
algorithm, the value function (with discount factor 𝛼 = 0.9) is approximated by a fully connected neural network with three hidden
layers. Training samples are generated from simulated transitions 𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑟(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ). All models are trained using the Adam optimizer with
a learning rate of 0.01 and implemented in Python with PyTorch on an Apple M1-based MacBook.

                        Table 2
                        Neural network architectures and training conﬁgurations.
                                  Module                     Architecture           Activation   Epochs      Batch Size

                           Waiting Time Estimation   NN (32-16) + zone embedding      ReLU         400         1000
                            Demand Forecasting               RNN (64-32)              Tanh         200         1000
                           Travel Time Estimation             NN (32-16)              ReLU         400         1000
                          ADP Value Approximation            NN (32-16-4)          Leaky ReLU     1000         1000

                        Note: Numbers in parentheses indicate the numbers of neurons in the hidden layers.


    Note that the proposed integral demand formulation is not restricted to any speciﬁc functional form of the joint VOT-WTP distribu-
tion. The framework is suﬃciently general to accommodate any joint distribution, provided that the corresponding probability density
or cumulative distribution functions are well deﬁned. In line with Zhang et al. (2018), a truncated bivariate normal distribution is
adopted to characterize customer heterogeneity in VOT and WTP:
                                                   (        )
                                                    64   0
       (𝑣𝑐 , 𝑤𝑐 ) ∼  (𝜇, Σ), 𝜇 = (24, 18)⊤ , Σ =                                                                                (30)
                                                     0   36
where the mean VOT is set to 𝜇(𝑣𝑐 ) = 24 USD/hour, which is consistent with the estimated average VOT of 24.47 USD/hour in the
United States reported by Gao et al. (2019). The corresponding standard deviation is 𝜎(𝑣𝑐 ) = 8 USD/hour. The mean WTP is set to
𝜇(𝑤𝑐 ) = 18 USD with a standard deviation of 𝜎(𝑤𝑐 ) = 6 USD.




                             Fig. 8. Heterogeneous demand modeled by a truncated bivariate normal distribution.


    In general, individual incomes exhibit a long-tailed distribution, with most individuals concentrated at lower income levels and a
relatively small proportion of high-income earners raising the overall mean (Neal and Rosen, 2000). The distribution of VOT exhibits a


  1 NYC TLC opendata: https://www1.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page


                                                                       14
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                     Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895


similar characteristic. Customers with diﬀerent VOT and WTP levels naturally exhibit heterogeneous travel preferences. Accordingly,
we focus on customers whose VOT exceeds the median, as they represent a substantial proportion of the ride-sourcing market and are
more likely to be time-sensitive and willing to pay a premium for improved service. Based on this consideration, the bivariate normal
distribution of VOT and WTP is truncated to 𝑣𝑐 ∈ [16, 48] USD/hour and 𝑤𝑐 ∈ [12, 36] USD, respectively, as shown in Fig. 8a. Each
sampled point represents an individual customer characterized by a unique combination of VOT and WTP values. The corresponding
density is illustrated in Fig. 8b, where darker blue shades indicate regions with higher customer density.

4.2. Simulation results analysis

   In this section, we comprehensively evaluate the performance of the proposed framework from multiple perspectives. Speciﬁcally,
we examine its performance under diﬀerent demand patterns in Section 4.2.1, assess the impact of integrating the queue-jumping
option into the dynamic pricing framework in Section 4.2.2, evaluate the beneﬁts of the rolling horizon approach in Section 4.2.3,
and investigate the eﬀectiveness of the event-triggered scheme in Section 4.2.4. Finally, we compare the proposed ADP solution with
other alternative approaches in Section 4.2.5.

4.2.1. Performance under diﬀerent demand patterns
    To investigate the eﬀects of diﬀerent demand patterns, we consider two additional cases: homogeneous demand (HD) and ﬁnite
discrete demand (FDD). Given the mean values of VOT and WTP, HD is modeled as a single representative customer type with (24, 18).
FDD is approximated by three discrete customer groups with VOT and WTP levels below, equal to, and above the mean, represented
by (18,12), (24,18), and (30,24), respectively. The heterogeneous demand is modeled by a truncated bivariate normal distribution
(TBND) deﬁned in (30).

                           Table 3
                           Performance under diﬀerent demand patterns.
                                       Demand type                HD                 FDD               TBND

                                      Proﬁt (USD)               413,236             513,858           648,462
                                        Trip fare               486,003             591,865           727,732
                                 Queue-jumping premium           1,406               4,521             15,673
                                  Routing consumption            74,173             82,528             94,943

                                      Abandonment               37,644              35,013            17,130
                                     Realized orders            42,356              44,987            62,677
                                     Reserved orders            42,356              44,987            62,870

                                                 Realized       41,465              42,773            44,697
                                   Waitinga
                                                 Reserved       41,465              42,773            44,890
                                                 Realized        891                 2,214            17,980
                             Queue-jumpingb
                                                 Reserved        891                 2,214            17,980
                             a Number of waiting customers.
                             b Number of queue-jumping customers.
                             c Note: The same interpretation applies to all subsequent tables.



   Table 3 summarizes the performance of the proposed framework under diﬀerent demand pattern assumptions. Compared with
the HD scenario, the FDD setting yields moderate improvements in both reserved and realized orders. Meanwhile, the number of cus-
tomers choosing the queue-jumping option increases by nearly 150%, leading to a 24.3% increase in system proﬁt. This improvement




                                                Fig. 9. Diﬀerent log-normal demand distributions.

                                                                         15
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                       Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895


demonstrates the beneﬁt of introducing representative customer types, which enables diﬀerentiated pricing and queue-jumping de-
cisions across customer segments. Building on this, the heterogeneous demand setting, modeled by a continuous distribution of VOT
and WTP, achieves the highest system proﬁt. Signiﬁcant increases in both realized and reserved orders, together with a substantial
reduction in customer abandonments, contribute to higher revenues from trip fares and queue-jumping premiums. Moreover, a larger
proportion of customers choose either to wait or jump the queue, indicating more eﬀective market segmentation. Consequently, the
proposed framework is able to allocate vehicle capacity more eﬃciently while better aligning pricing decisions with heterogeneous
customer preferences. Overall, these ﬁndings highlight the importance of accurately capturing customer heterogeneity for improving
operational eﬃciency, market segmentation, and system proﬁtability.
    To demonstrate that the proposed framework can accommodate alternative demand distributions, a bivariate log-normal distri-
bution is adopted to capture the right-skewed and long-tailed characteristics of customer VOT and WTP, as illustrated in Fig. 9a. This
distribution reﬂects the presence of a small proportion of customers with exceptionally high VOT and WTP values and is speciﬁed as
                                                      (           )
                                                        0.1  0.03
       (ln 𝑣, ln 𝑤) ∼  (𝜇, Σ), 𝜇 = (3.1, 2.8)⊤ , Σ =
                                                       0.03   0.1
where 𝑣 and 𝑤 denote the VOT and WTP, respectively. This speciﬁcation induces right-skewed marginal distributions while preserving
the positive correlation between the two variables. The distribution is further truncated to 𝑣𝑐 ∈ [16, 48] USD/hour and 𝑤𝑐 ∈ [12, 36]
USD, as shown in Fig. 9b.

                           Table 4
                           Performance under diﬀerent log-normal demand distributions.
                                                                    LND                         TLND

                                   Proﬁt (USD)                     529,022                     629,544
                                     Trip fare                     607,342                     709,133
                              Queue-jumping premium                 14,634                      20,806
                               Routing consumption                  92,954                     100,395

                                   Abandonment                     23,989                       15,367
                                  Realized orders                  55,782                       63,211
                                  Reserved orders                  56,011                       64,633

                                              Realized             40,534                       42,727
                                Waiting
                                              Reserved             40,762                       44,032
                                              Realized             15,248                       20,484
                             Queue-jumping
                                              Reserved             15,249                       20,601


   Table 4 summarizes the performance of the proposed framework under the log-normal distribution (LND) and truncated log-
normal distribution (TLND) settings. Compared with LND, TLND achieves a clear improvement in system performance. System proﬁt
increases by nearly 19%, accompanied by substantial increases in both realized and reserved orders. This improvement is primarily
driven by a shift in demand composition. The truncated distribution captures a larger proportion of customers with higher VOT and
WTP (see Fig. 10), which better reﬂects the target customer base of ride-sourcing platforms. Under TLND, a larger proportion of
customers choose either to wait or to jump the queue. In particular, the number of customers selecting the queue-jumping option
increases substantially, indicating a stronger willingness to pay for priority service.




                                          Fig. 10. Histograms of diﬀerent log-normal distributions.

   Overall, a truncated heterogeneous demand distribution better captures the demand characteristics of ride-sourcing platforms. By
accounting for the joint distribution of VOT and WTP, the proposed framework increases the number of reserved orders, improves
service for high-value customers, and ultimately enhances system proﬁtability.

                                                                     16
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                  Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895


                          Table 5
                          Performance with and without queue-jumping.
                                                           With queue-jumping         Without queue-jumping

                                  Proﬁt (USD)                    648,462                     618,801
                                    Trip fare                    727,732                     715,487
                             Queue-jumping premium                15,673                         –
                              Routing consumption                 94,943                      96,686

                                  Abandonment                    17,130                       18,442
                                 Realized orders                 62,677                       61,382
                                 Reserved orders                 62,870                       61,558

                                             Realized            44,697                       61,382
                              Waiting
                                             Reserved            44,890                       61,558
                                             Realized            17,980                          –
                           Queue-jumping
                                             Reserved            17,980                          –




4.2.2. Eﬀect of the queue-jumping option
   Table 5 summarizes the performance of the proposed framework with and without the queue-jumping option. Overall, introduc-
ing the queue-jumping option leads to a modest improvement in system proﬁt, primarily driven by an increase in fulﬁlled orders
and additional revenue from priority services. By allowing customers with higher VOT and WTP to receive higher service priority,
the queue-jumping mechanism improves the allocation eﬃciency of limited vehicle supply under high demand conditions, thereby
partially alleviating the supply-demand imbalance.




                               Fig. 11. Customer choices for diﬀerent OD pairs within a decision interval.

                                                                   17
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                  Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895


   Queue-jumping also redistributes service opportunities across customer groups. Fig. 11a and b illustrate customer decision-making
behaviors under high demand and medium to low demand scenarios, respectively.
   In high demand scenarios, a substantial proportion of customers, particularly those with medium and low VOT, choose to abandon
their requests in response to elevated prices. Among those who continue to place orders, customers with low VOT and high WTP
(upper-left corner in Fig. 11a) are more likely to wait than to jump the queue, as the cost of waiting is relatively low compared with
the queue-jumping premium. In contrast, customers with high VOT and high WTP (upper-right corner in Fig. 11a) exhibit a stronger
preference for time savings and are therefore more likely to select the queue-jumping option. These patterns are consistent with the
market segmentation shown in Fig. 4a, highlighting heterogeneous behavioral responses across customer segments.
   In medium to low demand scenarios, where supply-demand conditions are less constrained, some customers remain unserved.
Customers with high VOT and high WTP (upper-right corner in Fig. 11b) face a trade-oﬀ between waiting and abandoning their
requests. Those with relatively lower WTP are more likely to abandon, whereas those with higher WTP are more willing to wait. This
behavior is consistent with practical ride-sourcing operations, where customers in areas with limited or unevenly distributed vehicle
supply often decide whether to wait for service or abandon their requests.

4.2.3. Eﬀects of rolling horizon approach
    Fig. 12 illustrates the number of trip orders across diﬀerent VOT levels for each zone, including the total generated demand
(Origin) and the realized demand under diﬀerent planning settings. Overall, demand decreases monotonically as VOT increases across
all zones. Although supply constraints prevent all demand from being served, the extended planning horizon consistently realizes a
larger proportion of demand than the short horizon setting. By anticipating future demand and supply conditions, it enables more
strategic pricing, dispatching, and relocation decisions. Consequently, the system serves a larger proportion of demand, particularly
customers with medium to low VOT, who constitute the majority of the market. This advantage is especially evident in high-demand
zones (Zones 4–6), where the queue-jumping option is more frequently utilized. The extended planning horizon allows the system to
better balance serving current demand with preserving capacity for future requests.




                        Fig. 12. Reservation and realization of demand across diﬀerent planning horizons and zones.



4.2.4. Eﬀects of event-triggered scheme
    Fig. 13 presents the system proﬁt, reservation rate, and service rate under diﬀerent event-triggered thresholds. The reservation
rate is deﬁned as the ratio of reserved to total orders, while the service rate is the ratio of fulﬁlled to total orders. A threshold of
1.0 corresponds to the baseline without the event-triggered scheme, where pricing decisions are updated at every decision epoch.
Thresholds from 1.1 to 1.3 represent increasing levels of event-triggering, resulting in less frequent pricing updates.
    The event-triggered scheme generally improves the platform’s service performance. However, its impact on system proﬁt depends
on the threshold. Among all tested values, a threshold of 1.1 achieves the highest system proﬁt, reservation rate, and service rate.

                                                                    18
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                      Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895




                                         Fig. 13. Performance under diﬀerent event-triggered thresholds.




             Fig. 14. Comparison of price multiplier and supply-demand condition under diﬀerent event-triggered thresholds (OD (5,7)).




When the threshold exceeds 1.1, the reservation rate continues to increase, whereas the service rate declines. This result indicates
that the platform reserves more orders than it can ultimately fulﬁll. The main reason is that less frequent pricing updates reduce the
platform’s responsiveness to supply-demand changes, as shown in Fig. 14. For example, under a threshold of 1.3, the price multiplier
remains low for an extended period (see Fig. 14a). Meanwhile, demand begins to surge around 9:40 (see Fig. 14b). The delayed
pricing adjustment leads to suboptimal pricing decisions and lower system proﬁt.

                                                                        19
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                     Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895


   These results suggest that a threshold of 1.1 provides a good balance between stabilizing price ﬂuctuations and maintaining
responsiveness to dynamic supply-demand conditions. Consequently, it achieves the best overall performance on the Manhattan
network. The optimal threshold may vary across networks and requires further analysis for other settings.

4.2.5. Comparison between ADP and alternative approaches
    To evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed dispatching and relocation module, the ADP approach is compared with two rein-
forcement learning approaches: MARL-TD3 and GraphDQN.

 • MARL-TD3: A multi-agent reinforcement learning framework built upon Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3)
   (Fujimoto et al., 2018). Vehicles are modeled as cooperative agents that generate continuous dispatching and relocation actions in
   the coordinate space. The policy is trained to maximize the cumulative system reward, thereby improving long-term operational
   performance.
 • GraphDQN: A graph-based deep Q-network in line with Yu and Hu (2022), where the transportation network is represented

   as a graph and node embeddings are learned through graph convolution layers. Based on the aggregated spatial features, the
   Q-network determines dispatching and relocation actions while explicitly capturing inter-zone spatial dependencies.

   For a fair comparison, all methods share the same simulation environment, demand realization process, state representation, and
reward function. The hyperparameters of the baseline methods are carefully tuned to ensure stable training and convergence.


                  Table 6
                  Performance comparison with baseline methods.
                                                       Service Rate        Avg. Waiting   Avg. Empty          Computation
                       Method          Proﬁt ($)
                                                           (%)               Time (s)     VMT (mile)           Time (min)

                     MARL-TD3           652,338           80.9                188.6          86.1                 28.6
                     GraphDQN           631,840           77.1                181.3          81.3                 36.9
                     ADP (Ours)         648,462           78.5                167.7          77.8                 24.3



   Table 6 summarizes the performance of MARL-TD3, GraphDQN, and the proposed ADP approach. Among the three methods,
MARL-TD3 achieves the highest proﬁt and service rate, demonstrating the eﬀectiveness of multi-agent coordination in improving
long-term operational performance. However, these gains come at the expense of longer customer waiting times, higher empty vehicle
miles traveled (VMT), and substantially greater computational cost. GraphDQN incorporates the spatial structure of the road network
through graph convolution, but the additional model complexity leads to considerable computational overhead while providing only
marginal improvements in operational performance.
   In comparison, the proposed ADP approach achieves proﬁt and service rate comparable to those of MARL-TD3 while substantially
reducing customer waiting times, empty VMT, and computational cost. This balanced performance indicates that the proposed method
eﬀectively coordinates dispatching and relocation decisions while maintaining high computational eﬃciency. The lower waiting times
and empty VMT also suggest more eﬃcient vehicle utilization and improved matching between supply and demand. Overall, these
results demonstrate that the proposed approach provides a favorable trade-oﬀ between service quality, operational eﬃciency, and
computational complexity, making it well suited for large-scale ride-sourcing applications.

4.3. Discussion on model robustness

4.3.1. Eﬀects of spatial partitioning
    The granularity of spatial partitioning inﬂuences both the computational eﬃciency of the framework and the proﬁtability of the
platform. Since dispatching determines vehicle-customer matching and routing decisions, it is performed at the link-node level, where
spatial diﬀerences can substantially aﬀect pickup time, detour distance, and matching outcomes.
    In contrast, the pricing module is designed to regulate aggregate supply-demand imbalance and customer competition within a
zone rather than optimize individual matches. Consequently, pricing does not require the same level of spatial resolution. Applying
pricing at the link-node level would result in overly sparse demand within each unit, reducing meaningful customer competition and
limiting the eﬀectiveness of dynamic pricing. In addition, the resulting waiting time and demand estimates would become increasingly
noisy, leading to higher computational complexity without corresponding performance gains.
    Aggregating links and nodes into larger pricing zones increases demand density and preserves meaningful competition among cus-
tomers. However, using overly coarse partitions, such as treating the entire city as a single zone, fails to capture spatial heterogeneity
and local supply-demand imbalances. Therefore, the number of pricing zones represents a non-monotonic trade-oﬀ between spatial
resolution and estimation reliability. Increasing the number of zones initially improves system performance by capturing localized
market conditions more accurately, whereas excessive partitioning eventually degrades performance because of demand sparsity and
unreliable estimates. To quantify this trade-oﬀ, a one-at-a-time sensitivity analysis is conducted.




                                                                      20
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                      Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895




                                          Fig. 15. Topology of diﬀerent OD zones in Manhattan.




   Fig. 16 presents the system performance under diﬀerent spatial partitions, with the corresponding zone layouts shown in Fig. 15.
Increasing the number of pricing zones from 2 to 8 leads to noticeable improvements in both proﬁt and service rate, suggesting
that the pricing strategy under a ﬁner spatial partition better captures localized supply-demand conditions. However, further in-
creasing the number of zones to 13 degrades system performance, with both proﬁt and service rate declining. As shown in Fig. 16c,
the computational time increases steadily as the number of zones grows. These results indicate that, for the Manhattan network
considered in this study, an 8-zone partition achieves a favorable balance between operational performance and computational
eﬃciency.




                                         Fig. 16. Performance under diﬀerent spatial partitioning.




4.3.2. Driver behavior
    The current framework assumes full driver compliance with platform dispatching and relocation decisions, a common assumption
in centralized ride-sourcing optimization. In practice, ride-sourcing platforms employ various incentive and penalty mechanisms to
promote driver compliance. Acceptance-rate requirements and temporary account suspensions are commonly used, particularly for
dispatched orders. Nevertheless, drivers may still reject assigned requests in real-world operations, introducing additional uncertainty
into system performance.
    To evaluate the robustness of the proposed framework under driver non-compliance, scenarios with driver rejection rates of
0%, 5%, 10%, or 15% are considered. Rejected requests are returned to the matching pool, potentially causing additional delays or
eventual abandonment. Fig. 17 summarizes the system performance under diﬀerent rejection rates.
    As the rejection rate increases, the service rate decreases while the average waiting time increases. However, system proﬁt does
not necessarily decline. Since rejected drivers remain available for subsequent requests and no rejection penalties are imposed, the
resulting supply shortage encourages the platform to increase both the price multiplier and the queue-jumping premium (see Fig. 17d).
The higher revenue generated from each completed trip partially oﬀsets the reduction in service volume. Although this mechanism
helps sustain short-term proﬁtability, it may reduce customer satisfaction and long-term demand, ultimately weakening the platform’s
competitiveness.
    Overall, the proposed framework maintains stable performance under moderate driver rejection rates through adaptive pricing
and dispatching decisions. Extending the framework to explicitly model driver incentives and compliance behavior constitutes an
important direction for future research.

                                                                    21
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                  Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895




                                       Fig. 17. Performance under diﬀerent driver rejection rates.

5. Conclusion

    This paper proposed an OD-based dynamic pricing framework that addresses key limitations in existing ride-sourcing strate-
gies by incorporating heterogeneous spatial-temporal demand and customer-speciﬁc behaviors. The framework captured the diverse
preferences of ride-sourcing users by incorporating customer-speciﬁc value of time (VOT) and willingness to pay (WTP) into an
integral-form demand function. Customers with diﬀerent VOT and WTP could choose to wait for a ride, abandon the trip, or jump
the queue by paying a premium. The dynamic pricing problem is formulated as a constrained optimization problem that jointly
determines origin-destination (OD)-based pricing and queue-jumping premiums. To eﬀectively manage both short-term operational
needs and long-term strategic goals, the framework incorporated a rolling horizon approach. This approach combined a short decision
interval for real-time pricing adjustments with a longer planning horizon incorporating queuing dynamics and future travel demand.
Furthermore, an event-triggered scheme was integrated to mitigate computational burden and stabilize pricing decisions, ensuring
eﬃcient and responsive price adjustments. Approximate Dynamic Programming (ADP) was employed to manage vehicle dispatching
and relocation at the link-node level. By jointly optimizing OD-based pricing, queue-jumping premium, and link-node-level vehicle
dispatching and relocation decisions, the proposed framework captures the complex interplay between demand elasticity, customer
heterogeneity, and supply distribution. Empirical validation on the Manhattan road network conﬁrmed the eﬀectiveness of the pro-
posed approach in improving platform proﬁtability, increasing demand satisfaction, and enhancing overall system eﬃciency. These
results suggest that incorporating behavioral and spatial-temporal heterogeneity into dynamic pricing and dispatching decisions is
critical for building more adaptive and responsive ride-sourcing systems.
    Future research could explore the trade-oﬀ between maximizing system proﬁt and ensuring customer fairness within dynamic
pricing strategies for ride-sourcing platforms. Priority-based matching may lead to longer waiting times for lower-paying customers,
which could reduce customer loyalty and trust. Oﬀering discounts or loyalty rewards to these customers may help mitigate fair-
ness concerns while maintaining system eﬃciency. Another important direction is the design of incentive mechanisms to improve
driver compliance, thereby enhancing the platform’s ability to meet demand and improve service quality. Understanding how
monetary incentives, reputation systems, or penalty structures inﬂuence driver behavior would strengthen the operational viabil-
ity of the proposed framework. In addition, developing more accurate approaches to characterize heterogeneous demand distri-
butions, particularly variations in customers’ VOT and WTP, remains a critical avenue for improving model realism and decision
eﬀectiveness.


CRediT authorship contribution statement

    Zheng Huang: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis, Con-
ceptualization; Renxin Zhong: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Methodology, Funding acquisition,
Conceptualization; Tianlu Pan: Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Formal analysis, Conceptualization; Enming Liang: Writ-
ing – review & editing, Visualization, Formal analysis, Conceptualization; Agachai Sumalee: Writing – original draft, Supervision,
Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization; Yunping Huang: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visual-
ization, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

                                                                   22
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                                         Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895


Acknowledgement

   The work in this paper was supported by research grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 72071214
& 62203239).

Data availability

    Data will be made available on request.

References

Abkarian, H., Mahmassani, H., 2024. Reinforcement learning for dynamic pricing of shared-use autonomous mobility systems considering heterogeneous users: model
    development and scenario testing. Transp. Res. Rec. 2678 (5), 758–770.
Bai, J., So, K.C., Tang, C.S., Chen, X., Wang, H., 2019. Coordinating supply and demand on an on-demand service platform with impatient customers. Manuf. Serv.
    Oper. Manag. 21 (3), 556–570.
Banerjee, S., Freund, D., Lykouris, T., 2022. Pricing and optimization in shared vehicle systems: an approximation framework. Oper. Res. 70 (3), 1783–1805.
Banerjee, S., Johari, R., Riquelme, C., 2015. Pricing in ride-sharing platforms: a queueing-theoretic approach. In: Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM Conference on
    Economics and Computation, p. 639.
Beojone, C.V., Zhu, P., Sirmatel, I.I., Geroliminis, N., 2024. A hierarchical control framework for vehicle repositioning in ride-hailing systems. Transp. Res. C: Emerg.
    Technol. 168, 104717.
Bimpikis, K., Candogan, O., Saban, D., 2019. Spatial pricing in ride-sharing networks. Oper. Res. 67 (3), 744–769.
Buchholz, N., Doval, L., Kastl, J., Matejka, F., Salz, T., 2025. Personalized pricing and the value of time: evidence from auctioned cab rides. Econometrica 93 (3),
    929–958.
Castillo, J.C., Knoepﬂe, D., Weyl, G., 2017. Surge pricing solves the wild goose chase. In: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation,
    pp. 241–242.
Chen, H., Jiao, Y., Qin, Z., Tang, X., Li, H., An, B., Zhu, H., Ye, J., 2019. InBEDE: integrating contextual bandit with TD learning for joint pricing and dispatch of
    ride-hailing platforms. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), pp. 61–70.
Chen, Q., Lei, Y., Jasin, S., 2024. Real-time spatial–intertemporal pricing and relocation in a ride-hailing network: near-optimal policies and the value of dynamic
    pricing. Oper. Res. 72 (5), 2097–2118.
Cohen, P., Hahn, R.W., Hall, J., Levitt, S.D., Metcalfe, R., 2016. Using big data to estimate consumer surplus: the case of uber. NBER Work. Pap. No.w22627.
    https://www.nber.org/papers/w22627
Fang, Z., Huang, L., Wierman, A., 2019. Prices and subsidies in the sharing economy. Perform. Eval. 136, 102037.
Fujimoto, S., Hoof, H., Meger, D., 2018. Addressing function approximation error in actor-critic methods. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
    pp. 1587–1596.
Gao, J., Ranjbari, A., MacKenzie, D., 2019. Would being driven by others aﬀect the value of travel time? Ridehailing as an analogy for automated vehicles. Trans-
    portation 46 (6), 2103–2116.
Garg, N., Ranu, S., 2018. Route recommendations for idle taxi drivers: ﬁnd me the shortest route to a customer! In: Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International
    Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 1425–1434.
Guo, Y., Su, Z., Yang, H., Liang, E., Zhong, C., Ma, W., 2026. A smart predict-then-optimize framework for vehicle rebalancing problem. Transp. Res. B: Methodol.
    206, 103411.
Gómez-Lobo, A., Tirachini, A., Gutierrez, I., 2022. Optimal prices for ridesourcing in the presence of taxi, public transport and car competition. Transp. Res. C: Emerg.
    Technol. 137, 103591.
Huang, Y., Zheng, N., Huang, Z., Liang, E., Hsu, S.-C., Zhong, R., 2025. Data-driven optimization for ride-sourcing vehicle dispatching and relocation under demand
    and travel time uncertainty. Transp. Res. C: Emerg. Technol. 178, 105217.
Huang, Y., Zheng, N., Liang, E., Hsu, S., Zhong, R., 2023. An approximate dynamic programming approach to vehicle dispatching and relocation using time-dependent
    travel times. In: 2023 IEEE 26th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), pp. 2652–2657.
Huang, Y., Zhu, P., Zhong, R., Geroliminis, N., 2024. A bi-level approach for optimal vehicle relocating in mobility-on-demand systems with approximate dynamic
    programming and coverage control. Transp. Res. E: Logist. Transp. Rev. 192, 103754.
Karamanis, R., Anastasiadis, E., Angeloudis, P., Stettler, M., 2020. Assignment and pricing of shared rides in ride-sourcing using combinatorial double auctions. IEEE
    Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 22 (9), 5648–5659.
Ke, J., Xiao, F., Yang, H., Ye, J., 2022. Learning to delay in ride-sourcing systems: a multi-agent deep reinforcement learning framework. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
    Eng. 34 (5), 2280–2292.
Lei, C., Jiang, Z., Ouyang, Y., 2020. Path-based dynamic pricing for vehicle allocation in ridesharing systems with fully compliant drivers. Transp. Res. B: Methodol.
    132, 60–75.
Lei, Z., Ukkusuri, S.V., 2023. Scalable reinforcement learning approaches for dynamic pricing in ride-hailing systems. Transp. Res. B: Methodol. 178, 102848.
Li, M., Xi, H., Xie, C., Shen, Z., Hu, Y., 2025. Real-time vehicle relocation, personnel dispatch and trip pricing for carsharing systems under supply and demand
    uncertainties. Transp. Res. B: Methodol. 193, 103154.
Liang, E., Wen, K., Lam, W. H.K., Sumalee, A., Zhong, R., 2021. An integrated reinforcement learning and centralized programming approach for online taxi dispatching.
    IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 33 (9), 4742–4756.
Ma, H., Fang, F., Parkes, D.C., 2022. Spatio-temporal pricing for ridesharing platforms. Oper. Res. 70 (2), 1025–1041.
Miao, F., Lin, S., Munir, S., Stankovic, J.A., Huang, H., Zhang, D., He, T., Pappas, G.J., 2015. Taxi dispatch with real-time sensing data in metropolitan areas: a receding
    horizon control approach. In: Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems, pp. 100–109.
Neal, D., Rosen, S., 2000. Theories of the distribution of earnings. Handb. Income Distrib. 1, 379–427.
Pan, T., Sumalee, A., Zhong, R., Indra-Payoong, N., 2013. Short-term traﬃc state prediction based on temporal-spatial correlation. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 14
    (3), 1242–1254.
Powell, W.B., 2007. Approximate Dynamic Programming: Solving the Curses of dimensionality. Vol. 703. John Wiley & Sons.
Qin, Z., Zhu, H., Ye, J., 2022. Reinforcement learning for ridesharing: an extended survey. Transp. Res. C: Emerg. Technol. 144, 103852.
Shi, B., Cao, Z., Luo, Y., 2022. A deep reinforcement learning based dynamic pricing algorithm in ride-hailing. In: International Conference on Database Systems for
    Advanced Applications, pp. 489–505.
Stokkink, P., Yang, Z., Geroliminis, N., 2025. Optimal matching for ridesharing systems with endogenous and ﬂexible user participation. Transp. Res. B: Methodol.
    200, 103290.
Sun, G., Boateng, G.O., Liu, K., Ayepah-Mensah, D., Liu, G., 2024. Dynamic pricing for vehicle dispatching in mobility-as-a-service market via multi-agent deep
    reinforcement learning. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 73 (8), 12010–12025.
Tang, W., Wang, H., Wang, Y., Chen, C., Chen, X., 2022. A bi-level optimization model for ride-sourcing platform’s spatial pricing strategy. J. Adv. Transp. 2022 (1),
    9120129.
Tran, P. A.T., Stokkink, P., 2026. A rolling horizon approach for multi-objective optimization of two-way logistics with postponed orders. Comput. Ind. Eng. 217,
    112046.

                                                                                    23
Z. Huang et al.                                                                                                     Transportation Research Part C 192 (2026) 105895


Wang, H., Yang, H., 2019. Ridesourcing systems: a framework and review. Transp. Res. B: Methodol. 129, 122–155.
Wang, X., He, F., Yang, H., Oliver Gao, H., 2016. Pricing strategies for a taxi-hailing platform. Transp. Res. E: Logist. Transp. Rev. 93, 212–231.
Wu, W., Sun, R., Liu, X., Huang, H., Tian, L., Shang, H., 2025. Optimal pricing and vehicle allocation in local ride-sharing markets with user heterogeneity. Transp.
   Res. C: Emerg. Technol. 174, 105084.
Xu, K., Saberi, M., Liu, W., 2022. Dynamic pricing and penalty strategies in a coupled market with ridesourcing service and taxi considering time-dependent order
   cancellation behaviour. Transp. Res. C: Emerg. Technol. 138, 103621.
Xu, M., Geroliminis, N., 2026. Knowledge-aware path planning for UAV parcel delivery and road monitoring. Transp. Res. C: Emerg. Technol. 190, 105780.
Yan, C., Zhu, H., Korolko, N., Woodard, D., 2020. Dynamic pricing and matching in ride-hailing platforms. Nav. Res. Logist. 67 (8), 705–724.
Yang, H., Shao, C., Wang, H., Ye, J., 2020. Integrated reward scheme and surge pricing in a ridesourcing market. Transp. Res. B: Methodol. 134, 126–142.
Yu, X., Shen, S., 2020. An integrated decomposition and approximate dynamic programming approach for on-demand ride pooling. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.
   21 (9), 3811–3820.
Yu, Z., Hu, M., 2022. Deep reinforcement learning with graph representation for vehicle repositioning. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 23 (8), 13094–13107.
Zha, L., Yin, Y., Xu, Z., 2018. Geometric matching and spatial pricing in ride-sourcing markets. Transp. Res. C: Emerg. Technol. 92, 58–75.
Zhang, J., Lindsey, R., Yang, H., 2018. Public transit service frequency and fares with heterogeneous users under monopoly and alternative regulatory policies. Transp.
   Res. B: Methodol. 117, 190–208.
Zhang, J., Zhu, R., Wang, J., 2025. Joint re-dispatching and pricing on a business-to-consumer ride-hailing platform. Transp. Res. E: Logist. Transp. Rev. 196, 103998.
Zhang, Z., Yang, L., Yao, J., Ma, C., Wang, J., 2024. Joint optimization of pricing, dispatching and repositioning in ride-hailing with multiple models interplayed
   reinforcement learning. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 36 (12), 8593–8606.
Zhong, R., Luo, J., Cai, H., Sumalee, A., Yuan, F., Chow, A. H.F., 2017. Forecasting journey time distribution with consideration to abnormal traﬃc conditions. Transp.
   Res. C: Emerg. Technol. 85, 292–311.
Zhou, X., Rong, H., Yang, C., Zhang, Q., Khezerlou, A.V., Zheng, H., Shaﬁq, Z., Liu, A.X., 2020. Optimizing taxi driver proﬁt eﬃciency: a spatial network-based markov
   decision process approach. IEEE Trans. Big Data 6 (1), 145–158.
Zhu, P., Sirmatel, I.I., Ferrari-Trecate, G., Geroliminis, N., 2024. A coverage control-based idle vehicle rebalancing approach for autonomous mobility-on-demand
   systems. IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 32 (5), 1839–1853.




                                                                                  24
